ggplot2 3.5.0 axes blog (#683)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/ggplot2-3-5-0-axes/index.Rmd

date: 2024-02-21
author: Teun van den Brand
description: >
    The 3.5.0 version of ggplot2 comes with an overhaul of the guide system.
    Read here what is new for axes.

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/white-and-black-measuring-tape-9rSP3SRUYh4
  author: CHUTTERSNAP

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", "roundup", or "other"
categories: [package] 
tags: [ggplot2, ggplot2-3-5-0]
---

<!--
TODO:
* [x] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [x] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [x] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [x] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [x] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [x] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [x] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [ ] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

We are pleased to release [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org) 3.5.0.
This is one blogpost among several outlining changes to axes.
Please find the [main release post](/blog/2024/02/ggplot2-3-5-0/) to read about other changes.

> Axes, alongside [legends](/blog/2024/02/ggplot2-3-5-0-legends/), are visual representations of scales and allow observes to translate graphical properties of a plot into information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Axes, alongside [legends](/blog/2024/02/ggplot2-3-5-0-legends/), are visual representations of scales and allow observers to read values off of a plot.
```

#|  are half the size of larger ticks.
p + scale_x_continuous(minor_breaks = scales::breaks_width(0.2)) +
  theme(
    axis.ticks.length = unit(5, "pt"),
    axis.minor.ticks.length = rel(0.5),
    axis.minor.ticks.x.bottom = element_line(colour = 'red'),
    axis.ticks.y = element_line(colour = "blue")
  )
```

## Capping

Axes can now also be 'capped' at the upper and lower end.
We hesitate to call this improvement 'new', as it has been a part of base R plotting since time immemorial.
When axes are capped, the axis line will not be drawn up to the panel edge, but up to the first and last breaks.
Unsurprisingly, this only affects plots where the axis line is not blank.

```{r capped_axes}
#| fig.alt: >
#|  Scatterplot of engine displacement versus highway miles per 
#|  gallon. The y-axis line starts at the bottom of the panel and continues to
#|  the top break. The x-axis line starts at the most left break and ends at
#|  the most right break.
ggplot(mpg, aes(displ, hwy)) +
  geom_point() +
  guides(
    x = guide_axis(cap = "both"), # Cap both ends
    y = guide_axis(cap = "upper") # Cap the upper end
  ) +
  theme(axis.line = element_line())
```

> ## Logarithmic axes

Reviewer: These look great!

To mirror `annotation_logticks()` more closely, you can set a negative tick length in the theme.

```{r log_ticks_inward}
#| fig.alt: >
#|  The same plot as above, but the tick marks now point inwards.

p + theme(axis.ticks.length = unit(-2.25, "pt"))
```

## Stacked axes

The last new axis is technically not an axis, but a way to combine axis.
`guide_axis_stack()` can take multiple other axes and combine them by placing them next to oneanother.
On its own, the usefulness of stacking axes is pretty limited.
However, when extensions start defining custom position guides, it is an easy way to mix-and-match axes from different extensions.
The first axis is placed next to the panel and subsequent axes are placed further away from the panel.
Axes, like legends, have acquired a `theme` argument that can be used to customise the display of individual axes.

```{r stack_axis}
#| fig.alt: >
#|  Scatterplot of engine displacement versus highway miles per 
#|  gallon. The x-axis resembles railroad tracks with labels in the middle and
#|  an additional line beneath.

> ggplot(mpg, aes(displ, hwy)) +

Reviewer: Do you have a more compelling example to show off here? I don't get why people would want this.

Reviewer 2: I think this is more compelling once guide extensions arrives - i.e. you could stack a discrete axis with a table giving different traits for the various levels... Or you could have a continuous axis with qualitative axis below to explain what the limits of the scale means (bad <-> good)... But I don't know off-hand of a compelling example that can be made with just the standard axes available from ggplot2

Author: I also don't think there is a compelling example to make with just the axes in ggplot2.

To give an example with some WIP guide extension, you could imagine a guide that draws labelled brackets at some interval, which would be a separate guide, but can be combined with the standard axis.

![image](https://github.com/tidyverse/tidyverse.org/assets/49372158/a9801809-19d7-4f05-8df4-034025ca4d88)

Reviewer: In that case, I think you might just mention this without an example, highlighting that it's an important building block for future work.
